README.md, before:

# Cross-Platform Vulkan Application

A cross-platform Vulkan application (SDL3 window, Vulkan 1.4 instance, physical/logical device; swapchain and triangle rendering to be added). Designed to work on Linux, Windows, and macOS with automated setup scripts.

**Vulkan everywhere, one codebase:** On **Linux** and **Windows** we use **native Vulkan drivers** (NVIDIA, AMD, Intel). On **macOS** (and iOS if you port) the Vulkan SDK uses **MoltenVK** (Vulkan → Metal). Same Vulkan API everywhere.

**Can I use MoltenVK on all PCs?** **No.** MoltenVK is **Apple-only** (it translates Vulkan → Metal). On Linux and Windows there is no Metal, so we use **native Vulkan drivers** — no MoltenVK, zero cost. You cannot "build with Molten on all PCs"; we use Vulkan on Linux/Windows and MoltenVK only when building on macOS/iOS.

### Platforms

| Platform | Vulkan / MoltenVK | In this repo | Build / run |
|----------|-------------------|--------------|-------------|
| **Linux** | Native Vulkan (NVIDIA, AMD, Intel) | ✅ Supported | Setup + build on Linux |
| **Windows** | Native Vulkan (NVIDIA, AMD, Intel) | ✅ Supported | Setup + build on Windows |
| **macOS** | MoltenVK (Vulkan → Metal) | ✅ Supported | Setup + build on a Mac |
| **iOS** | MoltenVK (Vulkan → Metal) | ✅ Docs + scaffold | [docs/platforms/ios.md](docs/platforms/ios.md), `platforms/ios/` |
| **Android** | Native Vulkan | ✅ Docs + scaffold | [docs/platforms/android.md](docs/platforms/android.md), `platforms/android/` |

### Am I ready to build for my platform?

| Platform | Ready when | Build command |
|----------|------------|---------------|
| **Linux** | Run `./setup.sh` on Linux | `scripts/linux/build.sh --debug` or `--release` |
| **Windows** | Run `scripts\windows\setup_windows.bat` and install what it asks | `scripts\windows\build.bat --debug` or `--release` |
| **macOS** | Run `./setup.sh` **on a Mac** (installs MoltenVK + SDL3 + CMake) | `scripts/linux/build.sh --debug` or `--release` |
| **iOS** | Install Xcode + MoltenVK for iOS; see [docs/platforms/ios.md](docs/platforms/ios.md) | Use `platforms/ios/` scaffold + Xcode |
| **Android** | Install Android Studio + NDK; see [docs/platforms/android.md](docs/platforms/android.md) | Use `platforms/android/` scaffold + NDK/CMake |

You build **for** each platform **on** that platform (Linux on Linux, Windows on Windows, macOS on a Mac). After setup for your current OS, you're ready to build for that OS.

### What to install right now (per platform)

| Platform | Install this (once) | Then |
|----------|---------------------|------|
| **Windows** | [Vulkan SDK](https://vulkan.lunarg.com/sdk/home#windows), [CMake](https://cmake.org/download/), Visual Studio 2022 (or MinGW), **nlohmann-json** (vcpkg) | Run `scripts\windows\setup_windows.bat`, then build |
| **Linux** | Vulkan + SDL3 + **nlohmann-json** + CMake + gcc (e.g. `./setup.sh` or `scripts/linux/setup_linux.sh`) | Run `./setup.sh`, then build |
| **macOS** | MoltenVK + SDL3 + **nlohmann-json** + CMake (e.g. `./setup.sh` or `brew install molten-vk sdl3 nlohmann-json cmake`) | Run `./setup.sh` on a Mac, then build |
| **Android** | [Android Studio](https://developer.android.com/studio) + NDK, or NDK + CMake; Vulkan headers/lib for Android | See [docs/platforms/android.md](docs/platforms/android.md) |
| **iOS** | Xcode (Mac), MoltenVK for iOS, CMake for iOS or Xcode project | See [docs/platforms/ios.md](docs/platforms/ios.md) |

Desktop (Windows, Linux, macOS): install the row above, then use the Quick Start for that OS. Android and iOS: follow the linked docs and use the scaffold in `platforms/android` and `platforms/ios`.

### What project setup installs

Running the project setup (e.g. `./setup.sh` on Linux/macOS or `scripts\windows\setup_windows.bat` on Windows) ensures these are available:

| Component | Purpose |
|-----------|---------|
| **Vulkan** (SDK / drivers + headers) | Graphics API and shader compilation (glslc) |
| **SDL3** | Window, input, and Vulkan surface on all platforms (required; install via package manager or let CMake fetch on first build) |
| **nlohmann-json** | JSON config file (required; must be installed — see Manual Setup per OS) |
| **CMake** + C++ compiler | Build system and toolchain |

SDL3 is part of the project setup: on Linux/macOS the setup script installs it; on Windows you can install it via vcpkg or let CMake fetch it when you run the first build.

### Windowing: one API for all?

**Windowing:** We use **SDL3** for window + Vulkan surface on **Linux, Windows, macOS** (and the same API supports **Android** and **iOS** when you build for those platforms).

Vulkan helpers: `SDL_Vulkan_CreateSurface`, `SDL_WINDOW_VULKAN`, `SDL_Vulkan_GetInstanceExtensions`.

## Quick Start

### Linux

1. **Run the setup script** (installs all dependencies automatically):
   ```bash
   ./setup.sh        # auto-detects Linux and runs scripts/linux/setup_linux.sh
   ```

2. **Build the project** (you must pass `--debug` or `--release`):
   ```bash
   scripts/linux/build.sh --debug     # Debug: logging + validation on
   scripts/linux/build.sh --release   # Release: optimized, no logging
   ```

3. **Run the application** (from project root):
   ```bash
   ./install/Debug/bin/VulkanApp      # after Debug build
   ./install/Release/bin/VulkanApp    # after Release build
   ```

**Debug vs Release:** The build script requires an explicit choice: `--debug` or `--release`. **Debug** enables logging and Vulkan validation layers; **Release** disables them and builds with optimizations. Both live under one folder each: `build/Debug`, `build/Release`, `install/Debug`, `install/Release`.

### Windows

1. **Run the setup script** (checks dependencies):
   ```cmd
   scripts\windows\setup_windows.bat
   ```

2. **Build the project** (you must pass `--debug` or `--release`):
   ```cmd
   scripts\windows\build.bat --debug     # Debug: logging + validation on
   scripts\windows\build.bat --release   # Release: optimized, no logging
   ```

3. **Run the application** (from project root):
   ```cmd
   install\Debug\bin\VulkanApp.exe     # after Debug build
   install\Release\bin\VulkanApp.exe    # after Release build
   ```

### macOS (Vulkan via MoltenVK)

On macOS we use the Vulkan SDK, which uses **MoltenVK** (Vulkan → Metal). Same Vulkan code; no change for Linux/Windows.

1. **Run the setup script** (on a Mac; installs MoltenVK + SDL3 + CMake via Homebrew):
   ```bash
   ./setup.sh        # auto-detects macOS and runs scripts/macos/setup_macos.sh
   ```
   Or manually: `brew install molten-vk sdl3 nlohmann-json cmake`

2. **Build the project** (you must pass `--debug` or `--release`):
   ```bash
   scripts/linux/build.sh --debug     # Debug: logging + validation on
   scripts/linux/build.sh --release   # Release: optimized, no logging
   ```

3. **Run the application** (from project root):
   ```bash
   ./install/Debug/bin/VulkanApp      # after Debug build
   ./install/Release/bin/VulkanApp    # after Release build
   ```

## Detailed Setup Instructions

### Automated Setup (Recommended)

The project includes automated setup scripts that handle dependency installation:

- **Linux**: `setup_linux.sh` - Automatically detects your distribution and installs all required packages
- **Windows**: `setup_windows.bat` - Checks for dependencies and guides you through installation
- **Dependency Checker**: `check_dependencies.sh` / `check_dependencies.bat` - Verifies all dependencies are installed

### Manual Setup

#### Linux (Arch / CachyOS)

```bash
sudo pacman -S --needed \
    vulkan-devel \
    vulkan-headers \
    vulkan-icd-loader \
    vulkan-validation-layers \
    sdl3 \
    nlohmann-json \
    cmake \
    make \
    gcc \
    base-devel
```

#### Linux (Ubuntu / Debian)

```bash
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install -y \
    libvulkan-dev \
    vulkan-tools \
    vulkan-validationlayers \
    libsdl3-dev \
    nlohmann-json3-dev \
    cmake \
    build-essential \
    g++
```

#### Linux (Fedora / RHEL)

```bash
sudo dnf install -y \
    vulkan-devel \
    vulkan-loader \
    vulkan-validation-layers \
    sdl3-devel \
    nlohmann-json-devel \
    cmake \
    gcc-c++ \
    make
```

#### Linux (openSUSE)

```bash
sudo zypper install -y \
    vulkan-devel \
    vulkan-loader \
    vulkan-validation-layers \
    libSDL3-devel \
    nlohmann-json-devel \
    cmake \
    gcc-c++ \
    make
```

#### Windows

1. **Install Vulkan SDK**:
   - Download from: https://vulkan.lunarg.com/sdk/home#windows
   - Run the installer
   - Add to PATH: `C:\VulkanSDK\<version>\Bin`

2. **Install CMake**:
   - Download from: https://cmake.org/download/
   - Add to PATH during installation

3. **Install C++ Compiler**:
   - **Option 1**: Visual Studio 2019/2022 (with C++ workload)
   - **Option 2**: MinGW-w64
   - **Option 3**: Clang

4. **SDL3** (required – part of project setup):
   - **Option A**: Let CMake fetch SDL3 on first build (FetchContent).
   - **Option B**: Install via vcpkg: `vcpkg install sdl3`

5. **nlohmann-json** (required for config file):
   - Install via vcpkg: `vcpkg install nlohmann-json`
   - Configure CMake with vcpkg toolchain, e.g. `-DCMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE=<vcpkg>/scripts/buildsystems/vcpkg.cmake`

#### macOS

1. **Install Vulkan SDK** (for MoltenVK):
   - Download from: https://vulkan.lunarg.com/sdk/home#mac
   - Or use Homebrew: `brew install molten-vk`

2. **Install dependencies via Homebrew**:
   ```bash
   brew install molten-vk sdl3 nlohmann-json cmake
   ```

## Building the Project

### Automated Build (Recommended)

- **Linux/macOS**: `scripts/linux/build.sh --debug` or `--release`
- **Windows**: `scripts\windows\build.bat --debug` or `--release`

You must pass `--debug` or `--release`. The script creates `build/Debug` or `build/Release`, configures CMake, compiles shaders, and builds. Run the app from `install/Debug/bin/VulkanApp` or `install/Release/bin/VulkanApp`.

### Manual Build

#### Linux/macOS

```bash
# Check dependencies (optional)
scripts/linux/check_dependencies.sh

# Debug build
mkdir -p build/Debug && cd build/Debug
cmake ../.. -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug
make -j$(nproc)
# Run from project root: ./install/Debug/bin/VulkanApp

# Or Release: build/Release, install/Release/bin/VulkanApp
```

#### Windows

```cmd
REM Check dependencies (optional)
scripts\windows\check_dependencies.bat

REM Debug build
mkdir build\Debug
cd build\Debug
cmake ..\.. -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug -G "Visual Studio 17 2022" -A x64
REM or MinGW: cmake ..\.. -G "MinGW Makefiles" -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug
cmake --build . --config Debug

REM Run from project root: install\Debug\bin\VulkanApp.exe
```

## Shader Compilation

**Note**: Shaders are automatically compiled during the CMake build process if `glslc` or `glslangValidator` is found in your PATH.

If automatic compilation doesn't work, you can compile shaders manually:

### Linux/macOS

```bash
./compile_shaders.sh
```

### Windows

```cmd
compile_shaders.bat
```

Or manually:
```cmd
glslc shaders\vert.vert -o shaders\vert.spv
glslc shaders\frag.frag -o shaders\frag.spv
```

## Project Structure

```
VulkanProjects/
├── CMakeLists.txt              # CMake build configuration (C++23, auto-compiles shaders)
├── setup.sh                    # Master setup script (auto-detects OS)
├── README.md                   # This file
├── .gitignore
├── docs/                       # Documentation index and guides
│   ├── README.md               # Doc index and quick links
│   ├── GITHUB_PUBLISH.md       # How to publish this repo to GitHub
│   ├── guidelines/             # Coding guidelines
│   ├── vulkan/                 # Tutorial order, swapchain, version support
│   ├── platforms/              # Android, iOS
│   └── future-ideas/
├── include/
│   ├── vulkan_app.h            # Main application class header
│   └── vulkan_utils.h          # Logging and Vulkan helpers
├── src/
│   ├── main.cpp                # Entry point
│   ├── vulkan_app.cpp          # Application implementation (instance, device, window)
│   └── vulkan_utils.cpp        # Utility stubs
├── shaders/
│   ├── vert.vert               # Vertex shader (GLSL source)
│   └── frag.frag               # Fragment shader (GLSL source)
├── scripts/
│   ├── linux/                  # build.sh, setup_linux.sh, check_dependencies.sh, etc.
│   ├── windows/                # build.bat, setup_windows.bat, etc.
│   └── macos/                  # setup_macos.sh
└── platforms/
    ├── android/                # Android scaffold and README
    └── ios/                    # iOS scaffold and README
```

Build output: `build/Debug`, `build/Release`, `install/Debug`, `install/Release`.

## Platforms: Vulkan vs MoltenVK

| Platform | Vulkan | MoltenVK | Cost |
|----------|--------|----------|------|
| **Linux** | Native (NVIDIA, AMD, Intel) | Not used | **Zero** |
| **Windows** | Native (NVIDIA, AMD, Intel) | Not used | **Zero** |
| **macOS** | No native Vulkan | Vulkan SDK uses MoltenVK (Vulkan → Metal) | Same Vulkan code |

So: **Linux and Windows have no MoltenVK cost** — we use the system Vulkan driver. **macOS** uses MoltenVK so the same Vulkan code runs; the project is set up for that from the start.

## Features

- ✅ **Cross-platform support** (Linux, Windows, macOS)
- ✅ **Vulkan everywhere** (native on Linux/Windows; MoltenVK on macOS)
- ✅ **Vulkan 1.4** requested at instance creation; see [docs/vulkan/version-support.md](docs/vulkan/version-support.md) for version notes
- ✅ **C++23** with SDL3 for windowing and Vulkan surface
- ✅ **Automated setup and build scripts** (setup.sh, scripts/linux/build.sh, scripts/windows/build.bat)
- ✅ **Automatic shader compilation** during CMake build
- ✅ **Dependency checking** (check_dependencies.sh / .bat)
- ✅ **Logging** (VulkanUtils::LogTrace/LogInfo/LogErr etc.; level-based, colored in terminal)
- ✅ **Physical device selection** (queue family check, device type scoring)
- ✅ **Logical device** with graphics queue
- ✅ **Window state** handled in the event loop (resize, minimize, maximize, fullscreen, etc.); see [docs/vulkan/swapchain-rebuild-cases.md](docs/vulkan/swapchain-rebuild-cases.md). Swapchain and draw loop to be added.
- 🔲 **Swapchain, render pass, pipeline, draw** — follow [docs/vulkan/tutorial-order.md](docs/vulkan/tutorial-order.md)

### Code style

Naming, comments, and style follow [docs/guidelines/coding-guidelines.md](docs/guidelines/coding-guidelines.md): **PascalCase** for functions, **type prefixes** for variables (`p`, `l`, `b`, `st`, etc.), explicit comparisons (no `!`), explicit casts for literals. Prefer `auto` for range-for and when the type is obvious; use `const` and small optimizations (e.g. caching to avoid redundant API calls) where appropriate. Full doc index: [docs/README.md](docs/README.md).

### Repository

To publish or clone from GitHub, see [docs/GITHUB_PUBLISH.md](docs/GITHUB_PUBLISH.md).

## Troubleshooting

### "WARNING: radv is not a conformant Vulkan implementation"

On **Linux with an AMD GPU**, the Mesa **RADV** driver may print this to the console when Vulkan initializes. It is **harmless**: RADV is widely used and works well for development. The message is hardcoded in the driver and cannot be disabled from the application. You can safely ignore it. If you need an officially conformant driver for certification, use AMD’s proprietary driver or AMDVLK instead of RADV.

### "Validation layers requested, but not available!"

This is a warning, not an error. The application will continue without validation layers. To install them:

- **Arch/CachyOS**: `sudo pacman -S vulkan-validation-layers`
- **Debian/Ubuntu**: `sudo apt-get install vulkan-validationlayers`
- **Fedora**: `sudo dnf install vulkan-validation-layers`

### CMake can't find Vulkan

**Linux**: Make sure Vulkan development packages are installed:
```bash
./check_dependencies.sh
```

**Windows**: Ensure Vulkan SDK is installed and in PATH:
```cmd
where glslc
```
If not found, add `C:\VulkanSDK\<version>\Bin` to your PATH.

### CMake can't find SDL3

CMake will fetch SDL3 via FetchContent if not found. Alternatively install SDL3:

- **Linux**: `sudo pacman -S sdl3` (Arch), `sudo apt install libsdl3-dev` (Debian/Ubuntu)
- **Windows**: Use vcpkg: `vcpkg install sdl3`
- **macOS**: `brew install sdl3`

### Shaders not compiling automatically

If automatic shader compilation fails:

1. Ensure `glslc` or `glslangValidator` is in your PATH
2. Compile manually using `compile_shaders.sh` or `compile_shaders.bat`
3. The compiled `.spv` files must be in the `build/shaders/` directory

### Build errors

1. **Check dependencies**: Run `check_dependencies.sh` or `check_dependencies.bat`
2. **Clean build**: Delete `build/` directory and rebuild
3. **Check compiler**: Ensure a C++23 compatible compiler is installed

## Portable Development

To set up on a new machine:

1. **Clone the project** (or copy it) to the new machine.
2. **Run the setup script** for your OS: `./setup.sh` (Linux/macOS) or `scripts\windows\setup_windows.bat` (Windows).
3. **Build**: `scripts/linux/build.sh --debug` (or `--release`) on Linux/macOS; `scripts\windows\build.bat --debug` (or `--release`) on Windows.
4. **Run**: `./install/Debug/bin/VulkanApp` or `install\Debug\bin\VulkanApp.exe` (or the Release path).

See [docs/GITHUB_PUBLISH.md](docs/GITHUB_PUBLISH.md) for pushing this repo to GitHub.

## Next Steps

- Add vertex buffers for more complex geometry
- Implement texture mapping
- Add uniform buffers for transformations
- Implement depth testing
- Add more advanced rendering features
- Add input handling (keyboard/mouse)

## License

This is a simple example project. Feel free to use and modify as needed.

Commit message:

feat: non-blocking shader loading, pipeline manager, multi-threaded loader
- Shaders: source in shaders/source/, compiled to build/shaders/; align
  CMake and compile_shaders scripts (Linux, Windows, macOS).
- Resources: resolve paths relative to executable (GetResourcePath) for
  config and shaders so the app works when shipped (exe + shaders/ + config/).
- Job queue: generic loader (LoadFile; LoadMesh/LoadTexture reserved),
  multiple worker threads (hardware_concurrency), ProcessCompletedJobs
  for main-thread dispatch.
- Shader manager: RequestLoad, GetShaderIfReady, GetShader, IsLoadReady;
  cache + pending, ref-count; no blocking when used with pipeline manager.
- Pipeline manager: RequestPipeline(key), GetPipelineIfReady(key);
  request only missing shaders (IsLoadReady); DestroyPipelines on
  swapchain recreate; scalable for multiple pipelines.
- VulkanApp: use PipelineManager; create framebuffers in InitVulkan;
  RecreateSwapchainAndDependents calls DestroyPipelines; draw when
  pipeline ready (no app-level ready flag).
- Config: default.json, config loader; PORTABLE_SETUP and README
  updated for scripts layout and shipping.
- Docs: plan-loading-and-managers, managers README, shaders README.

README.md, after:

# Cross-Platform Vulkan Application

A cross-platform Vulkan application (SDL3 window, Vulkan 1.4 instance, physical/logical device; swapchain and triangle rendering to be added). Designed to work on Linux, Windows, and macOS with automated setup scripts.

**Vulkan everywhere, one codebase:** On **Linux** and **Windows** we use **native Vulkan drivers** (NVIDIA, AMD, Intel). On **macOS** (and iOS if you port) the Vulkan SDK uses **MoltenVK** (Vulkan → Metal). Same Vulkan API everywhere.

**Can I use MoltenVK on all PCs?** **No.** MoltenVK is **Apple-only** (it translates Vulkan → Metal). On Linux and Windows there is no Metal, so we use **native Vulkan drivers** — no MoltenVK, zero cost. You cannot "build with Molten on all PCs"; we use Vulkan on Linux/Windows and MoltenVK only when building on macOS/iOS.

### Platforms

| Platform | Vulkan / MoltenVK | In this repo | Build / run |
|----------|-------------------|--------------|-------------|
| **Linux** | Native Vulkan (NVIDIA, AMD, Intel) | ✅ Supported | Setup + build on Linux |
| **Windows** | Native Vulkan (NVIDIA, AMD, Intel) | ✅ Supported | Setup + build on Windows |
| **macOS** | MoltenVK (Vulkan → Metal) | ✅ Supported | Setup + build on a Mac |
| **iOS** | MoltenVK (Vulkan → Metal) | ✅ Docs + scaffold | [docs/platforms/ios.md](docs/platforms/ios.md), `platforms/ios/` |
| **Android** | Native Vulkan | ✅ Docs + scaffold | [docs/platforms/android.md](docs/platforms/android.md), `platforms/android/` |

### Am I ready to build for my platform?

| Platform | Ready when | Build command |
|----------|------------|---------------|
| **Linux** | Run `./setup.sh` on Linux | `scripts/linux/build.sh --debug` or `--release` |
| **Windows** | Run `scripts\windows\setup_windows.bat` and install what it asks | `scripts\windows\build.bat --debug` or `--release` |
| **macOS** | Run `./setup.sh` **on a Mac** (installs MoltenVK + SDL3 + CMake) | `scripts/linux/build.sh --debug` or `--release` |
| **iOS** | Install Xcode + MoltenVK for iOS; see [docs/platforms/ios.md](docs/platforms/ios.md) | Use `platforms/ios/` scaffold + Xcode |
| **Android** | Install Android Studio + NDK; see [docs/platforms/android.md](docs/platforms/android.md) | Use `platforms/android/` scaffold + NDK/CMake |

You build **for** each platform **on** that platform (Linux on Linux, Windows on Windows, macOS on a Mac). After setup for your current OS, you're ready to build for that OS.

### What to install right now (per platform)

| Platform | Install this (once) | Then |
|----------|---------------------|------|
| **Windows** | [Vulkan SDK](https://vulkan.lunarg.com/sdk/home#windows), [CMake](https://cmake.org/download/), Visual Studio 2022 (or MinGW), **nlohmann-json** (vcpkg) | Run `scripts\windows\setup_windows.bat`, then build |
| **Linux** | Vulkan + SDL3 + **nlohmann-json** + CMake + gcc (e.g. `./setup.sh` or `scripts/linux/setup_linux.sh`) | Run `./setup.sh`, then build |
| **macOS** | MoltenVK + SDL3 + **nlohmann-json** + CMake (e.g. `./setup.sh` or `brew install molten-vk sdl3 nlohmann-json cmake`) | Run `./setup.sh` on a Mac, then build |
| **Android** | [Android Studio](https://developer.android.com/studio) + NDK, or NDK + CMake; Vulkan headers/lib for Android | See [docs/platforms/android.md](docs/platforms/android.md) |
| **iOS** | Xcode (Mac), MoltenVK for iOS, CMake for iOS or Xcode project | See [docs/platforms/ios.md](docs/platforms/ios.md) |

Desktop (Windows, Linux, macOS): install the row above, then use the Quick Start for that OS. Android and iOS: follow the linked docs and use the scaffold in `platforms/android` and `platforms/ios`.

### What project setup installs

Running the project setup (e.g. `./setup.sh` on Linux/macOS or `scripts\windows\setup_windows.bat` on Windows) ensures these are available:

| Component | Purpose |
|-----------|---------|
| **Vulkan** (SDK / drivers + headers) | Graphics API and shader compilation (glslc) |
| **SDL3** | Window, input, and Vulkan surface on all platforms (required; install via package manager or let CMake fetch on first build) |
| **nlohmann-json** | JSON config file (required; must be installed — see Manual Setup per OS) |
| **CMake** + C++ compiler | Build system and toolchain |

SDL3 is part of the project setup: on Linux/macOS the setup script installs it; on Windows you can install it via vcpkg or let CMake fetch it when you run the first build.

### Windowing: one API for all?

**Windowing:** We use **SDL3** for window + Vulkan surface on **Linux, Windows, macOS** (and the same API supports **Android** and **iOS** when you build for those platforms).

Vulkan helpers: `SDL_Vulkan_CreateSurface`, `SDL_WINDOW_VULKAN`, `SDL_Vulkan_GetInstanceExtensions`.

## Quick Start

### Linux

1. **Run the setup script** (installs all dependencies automatically):
   ```bash
   ./setup.sh        # auto-detects Linux and runs scripts/linux/setup_linux.sh
   ```

2. **Build the project** (you must pass `--debug` or `--release`):
   ```bash
   scripts/linux/build.sh --debug     # Debug: logging + validation on
   scripts/linux/build.sh --release   # Release: optimized, no logging
   ```

3. **Run the application** (from project root):
   ```bash
   ./install/Debug/bin/VulkanApp      # after Debug build
   ./install/Release/bin/VulkanApp    # after Release build
   ```

**Debug vs Release:** The build script requires an explicit choice: `--debug` or `--release`. **Debug** enables logging and Vulkan validation layers; **Release** disables them and builds with optimizations. Both live under one folder each: `build/Debug`, `build/Release`, `install/Debug`, `install/Release`.

### Windows

1. **Run the setup script** (checks dependencies):
   ```cmd
   scripts\windows\setup_windows.bat
   ```

2. **Build the project** (you must pass `--debug` or `--release`):
   ```cmd
   scripts\windows\build.bat --debug     # Debug: logging + validation on
   scripts\windows\build.bat --release   # Release: optimized, no logging
   ```

3. **Run the application** (from project root):
   ```cmd
   install\Debug\bin\VulkanApp.exe     # after Debug build
   install\Release\bin\VulkanApp.exe    # after Release build
   ```

### macOS (Vulkan via MoltenVK)

On macOS we use the Vulkan SDK, which uses **MoltenVK** (Vulkan → Metal). Same Vulkan code; no change for Linux/Windows.

1. **Run the setup script** (on a Mac; installs MoltenVK + SDL3 + CMake via Homebrew):
   ```bash
   ./setup.sh        # auto-detects macOS and runs scripts/macos/setup_macos.sh
   ```
   Or manually: `brew install molten-vk sdl3 nlohmann-json cmake`

2. **Build the project** (you must pass `--debug` or `--release`):
   ```bash
   scripts/linux/build.sh --debug     # Debug: logging + validation on
   scripts/linux/build.sh --release   # Release: optimized, no logging
   ```

3. **Run the application** (from project root):
   ```bash
   ./install/Debug/bin/VulkanApp      # after Debug build
   ./install/Release/bin/VulkanApp    # after Release build
   ```

## Detailed Setup Instructions

### Automated Setup (Recommended)

The project includes automated setup scripts that handle dependency installation:

- **Linux**: `setup_linux.sh` - Automatically detects your distribution and installs all required packages
- **Windows**: `setup_windows.bat` - Checks for dependencies and guides you through installation
- **Dependency Checker**: `check_dependencies.sh` / `check_dependencies.bat` - Verifies all dependencies are installed

### Manual Setup

#### Linux (Arch / CachyOS)

```bash
sudo pacman -S --needed \
    vulkan-devel \
    vulkan-headers \
    vulkan-icd-loader \
    vulkan-validation-layers \
    sdl3 \
    nlohmann-json \
    cmake \
    make \
    gcc \
    base-devel
```

#### Linux (Ubuntu / Debian)

```bash
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install -y \
    libvulkan-dev \
    vulkan-tools \
    vulkan-validationlayers \
    libsdl3-dev \
    nlohmann-json3-dev \
    cmake \
    build-essential \
    g++
```

#### Linux (Fedora / RHEL)

```bash
sudo dnf install -y \
    vulkan-devel \
    vulkan-loader \
    vulkan-validation-layers \
    sdl3-devel \
    nlohmann-json-devel \
    cmake \
    gcc-c++ \
    make
```

#### Linux (openSUSE)

```bash
sudo zypper install -y \
    vulkan-devel \
    vulkan-loader \
    vulkan-validation-layers \
    libSDL3-devel \
    nlohmann-json-devel \
    cmake \
    gcc-c++ \
    make
```

#### Windows

1. **Install Vulkan SDK**:
   - Download from: https://vulkan.lunarg.com/sdk/home#windows
   - Run the installer
   - Add to PATH: `C:\VulkanSDK\<version>\Bin`

2. **Install CMake**:
   - Download from: https://cmake.org/download/
   - Add to PATH during installation

3. **Install C++ Compiler**:
   - **Option 1**: Visual Studio 2019/2022 (with C++ workload)
   - **Option 2**: MinGW-w64
   - **Option 3**: Clang

4. **SDL3** (required – part of project setup):
   - **Option A**: Let CMake fetch SDL3 on first build (FetchContent).
   - **Option B**: Install via vcpkg: `vcpkg install sdl3`

5. **nlohmann-json** (required for config file):
   - Install via vcpkg: `vcpkg install nlohmann-json`
   - Configure CMake with vcpkg toolchain, e.g. `-DCMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE=<vcpkg>/scripts/buildsystems/vcpkg.cmake`

#### macOS

1. **Install Vulkan SDK** (for MoltenVK):
   - Download from: https://vulkan.lunarg.com/sdk/home#mac
   - Or use Homebrew: `brew install molten-vk`

2. **Install dependencies via Homebrew**:
   ```bash
   brew install molten-vk sdl3 nlohmann-json cmake
   ```

## Building the Project

### Automated Build (Recommended)

- **Linux/macOS**: `scripts/linux/build.sh --debug` or `--release`
- **Windows**: `scripts\windows\build.bat --debug` or `--release`

You must pass `--debug` or `--release`. The script creates `build/Debug` or `build/Release`, configures CMake, compiles shaders, and builds. Run the app from `install/Debug/bin/VulkanApp` or `install/Release/bin/VulkanApp`.

### Manual Build

#### Linux/macOS

```bash
# Check dependencies (optional)
scripts/linux/check_dependencies.sh

# Debug build
mkdir -p build/Debug && cd build/Debug
cmake ../.. -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug
make -j$(nproc)
# Run from project root: ./install/Debug/bin/VulkanApp

# Or Release: build/Release, install/Release/bin/VulkanApp
```

#### Windows

```cmd
REM Check dependencies (optional)
scripts\windows\check_dependencies.bat

REM Debug build
mkdir build\Debug
cd build\Debug
cmake ..\.. -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug -G "Visual Studio 17 2022" -A x64
REM or MinGW: cmake ..\.. -G "MinGW Makefiles" -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug
cmake --build . --config Debug

REM Run from project root: install\Debug\bin\VulkanApp.exe
```

## Shader Compilation

**Note**: Shaders are automatically compiled during the CMake build process if `glslc` or `glslangValidator` is found in your PATH.

If automatic compilation doesn't work, you can compile shaders manually. All scripts use **input** `shaders/source/` and **output** `build/shaders/` (same as CMake).

### Linux

```bash
scripts/linux/compile_shaders.sh
```

### macOS

```bash
scripts/macos/compile_shaders.sh
```

### Windows

```cmd
scripts\windows\compile_shaders.bat
```

Or manually (output to `build\shaders\` so the app finds them):
```cmd
glslc shaders\source\vert.vert -o build\shaders\vert.spv
glslc shaders\source\frag.frag -o build\shaders\frag.spv
```

## Project Structure

```
VulkanProjects/
├── CMakeLists.txt              # CMake build configuration (C++23, auto-compiles shaders)
├── setup.sh                    # Master setup script (auto-detects OS)
├── README.md                   # This file
├── .gitignore
├── docs/                       # Documentation index and guides
│   ├── README.md               # Doc index and quick links
│   ├── GITHUB_PUBLISH.md       # How to publish this repo to GitHub
│   ├── guidelines/             # Coding guidelines
│   ├── vulkan/                 # Tutorial order, swapchain, version support
│   ├── platforms/              # Android, iOS
│   └── future-ideas/
├── include/
│   ├── vulkan_app.h            # Main application class header
│   └── vulkan_utils.h          # Logging and Vulkan helpers
├── src/
│   ├── main.cpp                # Entry point
│   ├── vulkan_app.cpp          # Application implementation (instance, device, window)
│   └── vulkan_utils.cpp        # Utility stubs
├── shaders/
│   └── source/                 # GLSL source (vert.vert, frag.frag); compiled → build/shaders/
├── scripts/
│   ├── linux/                  # build.sh, compile_shaders.sh, setup_linux.sh, etc.
│   ├── windows/                # build.bat, compile_shaders.bat, setup_windows.bat, etc.
│   └── macos/                  # compile_shaders.sh, setup_macos.sh
└── platforms/
    ├── android/                # Android scaffold and README
    └── ios/                    # iOS scaffold and README
```

Build output: `build/Debug`, `build/Release`, `install/Debug`, `install/Release`.

## Platforms: Vulkan vs MoltenVK

| Platform | Vulkan | MoltenVK | Cost |
|----------|--------|----------|------|
| **Linux** | Native (NVIDIA, AMD, Intel) | Not used | **Zero** |
| **Windows** | Native (NVIDIA, AMD, Intel) | Not used | **Zero** |
| **macOS** | No native Vulkan | Vulkan SDK uses MoltenVK (Vulkan → Metal) | Same Vulkan code |

So: **Linux and Windows have no MoltenVK cost** — we use the system Vulkan driver. **macOS** uses MoltenVK so the same Vulkan code runs; the project is set up for that from the start.

## Features

- ✅ **Cross-platform support** (Linux, Windows, macOS)
- ✅ **Vulkan everywhere** (native on Linux/Windows; MoltenVK on macOS)
- ✅ **Vulkan 1.4** requested at instance creation; see [docs/vulkan/version-support.md](docs/vulkan/version-support.md) for version notes
- ✅ **C++23** with SDL3 for windowing and Vulkan surface
- ✅ **Automated setup and build scripts** (setup.sh, scripts/linux/build.sh, scripts/windows/build.bat)
- ✅ **Automatic shader compilation** during CMake build
- ✅ **Dependency checking** (check_dependencies.sh / .bat)
- ✅ **Logging** (VulkanUtils::LogTrace/LogInfo/LogErr etc.; level-based, colored in terminal)
- ✅ **Physical device selection** (queue family check, device type scoring)
- ✅ **Logical device** with graphics queue
- ✅ **Window state** handled in the event loop (resize, minimize, maximize, fullscreen, etc.); see [docs/vulkan/swapchain-rebuild-cases.md](docs/vulkan/swapchain-rebuild-cases.md). Swapchain and draw loop to be added.
- 🔲 **Swapchain, render pass, pipeline, draw** — follow [docs/vulkan/tutorial-order.md](docs/vulkan/tutorial-order.md)

### Code style

Naming, comments, and style follow [docs/guidelines/coding-guidelines.md](docs/guidelines/coding-guidelines.md): **PascalCase** for functions, **type prefixes** for variables (`p`, `l`, `b`, `st`, etc.), explicit comparisons (no `!`), explicit casts for literals. Prefer `auto` for range-for and when the type is obvious; use `const` and small optimizations (e.g. caching to avoid redundant API calls) where appropriate. Full doc index: [docs/README.md](docs/README.md).

### Repository

To publish or clone from GitHub, see [docs/GITHUB_PUBLISH.md](docs/GITHUB_PUBLISH.md).

## Troubleshooting

### "WARNING: radv is not a conformant Vulkan implementation"

On **Linux with an AMD GPU**, the Mesa **RADV** driver may print this to the console when Vulkan initializes. It is **harmless**: RADV is widely used and works well for development. The message is hardcoded in the driver and cannot be disabled from the application. You can safely ignore it. If you need an officially conformant driver for certification, use AMD’s proprietary driver or AMDVLK instead of RADV.

### "Validation layers requested, but not available!"

This is a warning, not an error. The application will continue without validation layers. To install them:

- **Arch/CachyOS**: `sudo pacman -S vulkan-validation-layers`
- **Debian/Ubuntu**: `sudo apt-get install vulkan-validationlayers`
- **Fedora**: `sudo dnf install vulkan-validation-layers`

### CMake can't find Vulkan

**Linux**: Make sure Vulkan development packages are installed:
```bash
./check_dependencies.sh
```

**Windows**: Ensure Vulkan SDK is installed and in PATH:
```cmd
where glslc
```
If not found, add `C:\VulkanSDK\<version>\Bin` to your PATH.

### CMake can't find SDL3

CMake will fetch SDL3 via FetchContent if not found. Alternatively install SDL3:

- **Linux**: `sudo pacman -S sdl3` (Arch), `sudo apt install libsdl3-dev` (Debian/Ubuntu)
- **Windows**: Use vcpkg: `vcpkg install sdl3`
- **macOS**: `brew install sdl3`

### Shaders not compiling automatically

If automatic shader compilation fails:

1. Ensure `glslc` or `glslangValidator` is in your PATH
2. Compile manually using `scripts/linux/compile_shaders.sh`, `scripts/macos/compile_shaders.sh`, or `scripts/windows/compile_shaders.bat`
3. The compiled `.spv` files must be in the `build/shaders/` directory

### Shipping / distribution

All resource paths (shaders, config) are resolved **relative to the executable**. When you ship the app, use one of these layouts:

- **Flat**: One folder containing the executable, a `shaders/` folder (with `.spv` files), and optionally `config/` (user and default JSON). The app finds them next to the exe.
- **Install target**: `install_local` produces `install/bin/`, `install/shaders/`, `install/config/`. Run the exe from `install/bin/`; it will find `../shaders/` and `../config/`.

You do not need to "run from" a specific directory; the executable’s location is the reference.

### Build errors

1. **Check dependencies**: Run `check_dependencies.sh` or `check_dependencies.bat`
2. **Clean build**: Delete `build/` directory and rebuild
3. **Check compiler**: Ensure a C++23 compatible compiler is installed

## Portable Development

To set up on a new machine:

1. **Clone the project** (or copy it) to the new machine.
2. **Run the setup script** for your OS: `./setup.sh` (Linux/macOS) or `scripts\windows\setup_windows.bat` (Windows).
3. **Build**: `scripts/linux/build.sh --debug` (or `--release`) on Linux/macOS; `scripts\windows\build.bat --debug` (or `--release`) on Windows.
4. **Run**: `./install/Debug/bin/VulkanApp` or `install\Debug\bin\VulkanApp.exe` (or the Release path).

See [docs/GITHUB_PUBLISH.md](docs/GITHUB_PUBLISH.md) for pushing this repo to GitHub.

## Next Steps

- Add vertex buffers for more complex geometry
- Implement texture mapping
- Add uniform buffers for transformations
- Implement depth testing
- Add more advanced rendering features
- Add input handling (keyboard/mouse)

## License

This is a simple example project. Feel free to use and modify as needed.
